# 2021-11-17 Material Sample Task Group Meeting
## Attendees
### 10AM MDT
Stan Blum, Steve Baskauf, Richard Pyle, Abby Benson, Roger Burkhalter, Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Dave Vieglais, Stephen Richard, John Wieczorek, Sharon Grant
### 4PM MDT
Simon Cox, Stan Blum, Sharon Grant, Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Richard Pyle
## Agenda Items
### Tasks from last meeting
### Items for discussion
1. dwc:Organism - do we need clarification? [Issue #23](https://github.com/tdwg/material-sample/issues/23)  
2. Organism /  MaterialSample Boundary [Issue #22](https://github.com/tdwg/material-sample/issues/22)  
3. [Organism/Occurrence/MaterialSample](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1xtGCHeXi4OBjx8jpP8FSVk4MeSXIRm5x9Av62m_OWec/edit#)  
4. FOCUS on MatrialSample class and what properties it should have.  
## Next steps and assignments
1. Review current definitions of terms we hope to assign as properties of dwc:MaterialSample class
    * Set up Google Sheet with terms for review - [MaterialSample and its properties](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KWWGF6p4BREoDZy7HeVbC3NEFIMzNbA78sMsOR6uX_k/edit?usp=sharing)
## Meeting Chat 10AM MDT
https://docs.google.com/document/d/  
From Sharon Grant to Me:  (Direct Message) 10:09 AM  
Sorry I was late - I had a trustee meeting.  
From Me to Everyone:  10:09 AM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yaP6rxZYEXNiTRgMGv1Iu_XenIFwiExVkQ39IZZjg2o/edit  
From Abby Benson to Everyone:  10:11 AM  
If anyone feels up to recording notes today I'm feeling a bit under the weather and have to leave at 30 minutes for the How Did It Die Task Group working meeting.  
From Sharon Grant to Me:  (Direct Message) 10:12 AM  
Do you want me to record?  
From Me to Sharon Grant:  (Direct Message) 10:12 AM  
yes, please!  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:12 AM  
DwC went through a period of considering opaque identifiers and it was rejected.  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:12 AM  
Apologies for jumping in late - I'll start recording  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:12 AM  
This was when the standard was being developed.  
From Sharon Grant to Me:  (Direct Message) 10:13 AM  
I think you have to give me host back  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:14 AM  
We did not consider whether is was alive.  
From Me to Sharon Grant:  (Direct Message) 10:16 AM  
I am not the host! When I try to record I get the message to ask for permission....  
I'm recording with a voice recorder.  
From Sharon Grant to Me:  (Direct Message) 10:17 AM  
got it  
From Me to Sharon Grant:  (Direct Message) 10:17 AM  
üëç  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:19 AM  
Discussing the boundary of ‚Äúorganism‚Äù is unrelated to doc:organism. Because they aren‚Äôt the same thing  
An organism (small ‚Äúo‚Äù) can die and that has no bearing on the dwc:Organism that links the occurrence to the taxon determination  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:20 AM  
Do we not actually record the evidence and infer the Occurrences? I  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:21 AM  
The problem here is with definition of dwc:Occurrence, not dwc:Organism  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:21 AM  
To me the Occurrence is an aeration we make based on evidence based on Organisms during Events.  
assertion, not aeration  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  10:21 AM  
the material sample has a collection event that has a date and time.  The lifetime of the organism indicated by the material sample is a differen thing.  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:22 AM  
+1 Stephen  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:22 AM  
Occurrences are really only one little thing we‚Äôre ultimately interested in, and we‚Äôre letting it rule our thinking.  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:22 AM  
Aaaah! No, @rich  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:23 AM  
Stratigraphy is analogus to the taxonomy  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:24 AM  
We have the GeologicalContext terms to describe the time aspect for fossils  
I.e. when the organism was there  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:24 AM  
exactly  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:27 AM  
We also have the ChronometricAge extension for the Occurrence part.  
Agreed, the problem is Occurrence as the central concept of interest.  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  10:28 AM  
occurrence: observation at a place and time of evidence of existance of organism  
the nature of the evidence is interpreted to understand if the organism was at that particular observation location  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:28 AM  
Occurrence: ‚ÄúAn assertion that an Organism existed at a place and time.‚Äù  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:30 AM  
@John: That's what I'm getting at.  We want to record the when/where/who of when a fossil was collected, and we want to use that to infer where an Organism was in the past.  So does that mean two Occurrence instances?  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:31 AM  
The collecting event is not the Occurrence, unless it happens to be that the thing collected was alive then.  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  10:32 AM  
the place in 'organism existed at a place and time' is not necessarily the same as the place where the observation was made  
or that a photo was taken of the organism at that place and time  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:32 AM  
The collecting event is an Event, but not an Occurrence  
From Stan Blum to Everyone:  10:33 AM  
You can‚Äôt *record* when the Dinosaur walked.  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:33 AM  
We abandon Occurrence as the core of what we capture and build Everything on Events.  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:33 AM  
I don‚Äôt think we need two occurrences. Have one occurrence with two terms for time (collection and when it was inferred to be alive, if different).  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:34 AM  
There is no human  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:35 AM  
I vehemently disagree that the collecting event is the Occurrence  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  10:35 AM  
yes, there is an observation event and an inferred occurrence event  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:36 AM  
You nailed it Teresa  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:38 AM  
I think we solve a lot by putting Event at the core, and having different things (Organisms, MaterialSamples) directly associated with those Events.  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:38 AM  
+1 Rich  
What we seriously lack is an eventType.  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:38 AM  
That was intended as a +1 John.... so back atcha...  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:39 AM  
Having event at the top allows for material samples unrelated to organisms (air samples for example) to be fit into the picture  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:41 AM  
A lot can be a dwc:Organism  
That share an organsmID  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:42 AM  
I think the problem we're wrestling with is that Occurrence has been the center, so we try to shoe-horn everything through the lens of Occurrence as it's defined.  
I think a Lot *can* be the entirety of an Organism (1:1), but I think a Lot is an aggregate of MaterialSamples  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:42 AM  
We will have to be very clear about what data owners/holders/producers will need to do with their existing data (and its ids) to line it up with what we decide.  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  10:42 AM  
so the "lot'  
is an aggregation. when individuals are identified and assigned a tazon, it becomes an occurrence  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:43 AM  
Then you are able to assert Occurrences. They aren‚Äôt Occurrences.  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:46 AM  
Agreed (Assert Occurrences)  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:47 AM  
Early in 2022, GBIF will start developing IPT to be able to overcome the star schema.  
The modeling work will almost certainly abandon Occurrence as a class.  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:47 AM  
I'm very-much looking forward to what you & Tim have come up with!  
From Me to Everyone:  10:47 AM  
üëç  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:48 AM  
The gran unified model to date finds no need (in fact lots of problems with) having an Occurrence to build around.  
From Roger Burkhalter to Everyone:  10:48 AM  
üëç  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:48 AM  
üéâ  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  10:49 AM  
FYI, Dave Remsen, Nicolas Bailey and I are getting close to proposing the grand unified model for taxonomy as well.  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:52 AM  
@Rich That‚Äôs good, because our model has Taxon, and nothing deeper, relying on the more in depth work in that space.  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  10:57 AM  
üëçüèΩ  
stay practical  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:58 AM  
Duplicates, when resolved, can share and eventID and an organismID. Forget occurrenceID.  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  10:58 AM  
+1 John. Assign them two different materialSampleIDs  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:59 AM  
The occurrenceIDs are fine as assertions.  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  11:00 AM  
+1 @John  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  11:03 AM  
üëçüèΩ  
From Steve Baskauf to Everyone:  11:06 AM  
Thank you for your excellent cat herding, Teresa!  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  11:07 AM  
Yes!  I feel that was a very productive discussion!  
From Stephen Richard to Everyone:  11:07 AM  
OOPS  
## Meeting Chat 4PM MDT  
From Me to Everyone:  03:59 PM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/  
From Stan Blum to Everyone:  04:01 PM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1oGieC6AQhy4fWVZnr8qI1iH1Mk-VzjtvGJyZWvM8ITM/edit?usp=sharing  
From Me to Everyone:  04:01 PM  
https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KWWGF6p4BREoDZy7HeVbC3NEFIMzNbA78sMsOR6uX_k/edit?usp=sharing  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  04:04 PM  
@Stan: I would use this as a starting point: https://github.com/darwin-sw/dsw  
Steve/Cam converged on almost exactly the same model as I/Rob did. MaterialSample corresponds to "Token" in this diagram (along with other lines of Evidence)  
From Me to Everyone:  04:09 PM  
From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  10:33 AM  
We abandon Occurrence as the core of what we capture and build Everything on Events.  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  04:27 PM  
Darwin's cat in a box  
From Richard Pyle to Everyone:  04:27 PM  
üëç  
From Simon Cox to Everyone:  04:35 PM  
https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/#PROV_Alignment   
'Result' of an Observation is _information_  
I think John was happy with this view and it corroborates the work that GBIF is doing  
Here I proposed that each transformed sample or fraction of a sample all exist as distinct samples  
https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/#sample-chains  
the 'isSampleOf' relationship joins them together.  
'CollectionEvent' or 'ActOfCollecting' is a specialization of 'ActOfSampling` I think  
From Simon Cox to Everyone:  04:42 PM  
'ActOfAccession` is probably another interesting one ;-)  
From Simon Cox to Everyone:  04:53 PM  
Here are the 'relations' in OBO: http://www.ontobee.org/ontology/catalog/RO?iri=http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl%23ObjectProperty  
There are currently 606 of them - http://www.ontobee.org/ontology/catalog/RO?iri=http://www.w3.org/2002/07/owl%23ObjectProperty&max=610  
From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  04:58 PM  
related resource extension  
https://tools.gbif.org/dwca-validator/extension.do?id=dwc:ResourceRelationship  
https://github.com/globalbioticinteractions  
From Simon Cox to Everyone:  04:58 PM  
https://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/relators.html  
https://id.loc.gov/vocabulary/relators/brl.html  
