# 2021-07-21 Material Sample Task Group Meeting
## Attendees
### 10AM MDT
Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Quentin Groom, Jutta Buschbom, Richard Pyle, Dave Vieglais, Steve Baskauf, Matt Woodburn, Gabi Droege, Abby Benson, Christian Bölling, Sharon Grant, John Wieczorek, Dag Endresen
### 4PM MDT
Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Roger Burkhalter, Steve Baskauf, Abby Benson, Richard Pyle, Stephen Richard, Michael Hope, Simon Cox, Greg Whitbread, John Wieczorek, Anne Fuchs, Sharon Grant
## Draft Charter
Review and edit the draft charter.
1. Need to determine which Interest Group supports us
    a. Observations and Specimens suggested - Quentin is the lead of that Interest Group and has pre-approval for this task team
        i. Interest Group follows up to make sure work is happening
2. Need to determine Core Members (contribution expected!) vs. Members (watching and reporting to other groups, contribution a bonus)
    a. No commitments from folks yet
    b. Core members should participate and contribute though - if you just want to watch what’s happening maybe change your status
    c. For the charter - the core members are there as folks to contact to make sure work is continuing for the task team
    d. Decision: keep everyone as core member for now but chose if you would like to change your status
3. A Co-Convenor would be nice
    a. Need a backup and team effort is better
    b. If you would like to take this on- move your name up to that section in the Draft Charter
4. Regular meeting time
    a. Teresa suggests one meeting per month, always the third Wednesday, alternating months with MDT morning and evening times.
    b. Suggestion to have working meetings sometimes to get things accomplished
5. Mailing list - A Google group OK with everyone?
6. Is the scope of the primary deliverable achievable?
    a. Issue is that it may not be possible to tackle MaterialSample without addressing basisOfRecord.
    b. The flatness of how we have organized things is an impediment to using the standard and we need to address Evidence
    c. If we are the MaterialSample task team maybe it isn’t our job to solve the problem but instead define the problem.
    d. Do we need to define MaterialSample so it does not apply to archaeological or other types of samples 
7. Should we add a Scope section to the document?
    a. Decision: yes
8. While Darwin Core is described as a bag of terms, people do apply semantics to it and this needs to be addressed. Is this within scope for this task team?
    a. It was intended for models to be built on top of the bag of terms but this has not been done.
    b. Suggestion: Developing a model would be an ideal outcome of this group.
        i. Suggestion: modeling within the limited scope of the role of MaterialSample, without trying to do it all.
        ii. maybe the scope of modelling includes the classes: MaterialSample, PreservedSpecimen, FossilSpecimen, LivingSpecimen(?), Identification(?), Occurrence(?), Organism(?), MeasurementOrFact(?)
    c. Any model needs to be usable by everyone- not just technically minded folks.
9. Recommended to setup our own repo in Github for this given the possible scope. Tim Robertson or possibly Quentin can setup.
10. Alignment with related ontologies/vocabularies?
    a. OGC, ISO, and W3C - definitions of samples and sampling - added to the Resources section of the Charter
11. Where do we put the data when we try to exchange it since we have artificial buckets - is herbarium specimen a preserved specimen or a material sample? Practical use of our decisions is important.
12. How to prevent scope creep- keep it to just material sample and any of the classes that it touches directly but without dealing with those directly.
    a. Do we want to make sure to link with geology data, etc?
13. Should we start from the point of view of use cases and determine if they work or not
    a. eDNA
    b. Herbarium sheet
    c. Soil sample
    d. Come up with a best practice for how the terms should be used
14. Changes can be made to the normative definitions of the terms, non-normative usage comments and examples
15. Examples of alignments between ontologies
    a. https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/#oboe
    b. https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/#PROV_Alignment
## Next steps and assignments
1. Finalize charter before next months meeting
2. Setup our own repo in the TDWG Github
3. Create mailing list (TDWG (http://lists.tdwg.org/mailman/listinfo)  or Google Group)
4. Sharon will schedule zoom events for the next meeting(s)

## Google Chat
You10:00 AM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zj-diRvKiFHFtx2xxsixD3HKEMLfsspzbF9Bk6wrxbA/edit#  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1y4xUOhfLZz6Vac-hBiXHJ2dI-k6O2ChqToCG7MkiWsQ/edit#heading=h.ukgoq0qho5f5  
J. Buschbom10:02 AM  
j.buschbom@web.de  
You10:03 AM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zj-diRvKiFHFtx2xxsixD3HKEMLfsspzbF9Bk6wrxbA/edit#  
Sharon Grant10:08 AM  
Hey Theresa https://github.com/tdwg/cd  
John Wieczorek10:26 AM  
Done. Comments added.  
Sharon Grant10:32 AM  
agreed  
Christian Bölling10:34 AM  
trying to fix it, go ahead!  
Abigail Benson10:39 AM  
If the bigger issue is the one we're actually trying to address then is this really a task team for that instead?  
John Wieczorek10:40 AM  
Good question Abby. I was going to ask if we could take a poll of people who expressed interest to see what their expectations were about what to solve here.  
John Wieczorek10:42 AM  
I think that is a sane approach, Rich.  
Richard Pyle10:43 AM  
PreservedSpecimen: "A specimen that has been preserved."  It doesn't get more circular than that!  
Gabi Droege10:45 AM  
we have no "Scope" chapter yet. Do we need it?  
Sharon Grant10:49 AM  
I think we do need a scope section  
Richard Pyle10:54 AM  
I fully agree,  I added a comment related to this (bag of terms --> proto-ontology) in the document.  
Quentin Groom10:55 AM  
do we need to move platform to continue? I can make a zoom  
You10:55 AM  
I extended the meeting (hopefully)!  
Quentin Groom10:55 AM  
ok, great!  
John Wieczorek10:57 AM  
Well said, Steve. That is exactly right.  
And there have been attempts to do the modeling, such as BCO.  
Richard Pyle10:58 AM  
Maybe a different Task Group is needed to start talking about evolving from a BoT to a model.  I suggest that Darwin-SW serve as the starting point for that discussion.  
(Though I admit I haven't been following BCO, so I could be convinced that would be a better starting point)  
John Wieczorek10:59 AM  
Would it be reasonable to do the modeling within the limited scope of the role of MaterialSample, without trying to do it all?  
You10:59 AM  
I think we could do that.  
John Wieczorek11:00 AM  
Exactly, just a piece is a good scope.  
Dave Vieglais11:00 AM  
Yep  
Richard Pyle11:00 AM  
Yes!  
Christian Bölling11:00 AM  
A (not the) model for the issues that can be extracted structurally from #314 (and possibly related sources.  
Richard Pyle11:01 AM  
But.... which classes in DwC would be out of this "limited" scope?  
John Wieczorek11:01 AM  
Taxon Concepts  
Richard Pyle11:01 AM  
So taxonomic identity of a MS instance is not a core aspect of the MS scope?  
John Wieczorek11:05 AM  
An example of things to not try to solve here, what is the nature of the dwc:Orgnism - dwc:Taxon continuum.  
Christian Bölling11:06 AM  
+1  
Sharon Grant11:06 AM  
One continuum to rule them all  
Dag Endresen11:06 AM  
Model the relation to eg. Taxon but note that Taxon and Taxon Concept itself are modelled elsewhere (for now)  
Richard Pyle11:07 AM  
So... maybe the scope of modelling includes the classes: MaterialSample, PreservedSpecimen, FossilSpecimen, LivingSpecimen(?), Identification(?), Occurrence(?), Organism(?), MeasurmentOrFact(?)  
Gabi Droege11:08 AM  
that's a good start Richard.  
Steve Baskauf11:09 AM  
+1 Rich  
Richard Pyle11:09 AM  
These are things I would imagine would be directly associated with a MS instance.  The other DwC classes would (presumably) be inherited by one of these relationships.  
Christian Bölling11:10 AM  
I love the interfacing of resources and conversations possible on GitHub.  
Richard Pyle11:10 AM  
Oh, and I guess if MeasurementOrFact is included, then so should be ResourceRelationship.  
Gabi Droege11:11 AM  
so you can't have a subrepo in a repo?  
Steve Baskauf11:12 AM  
I think there is only one issue tracker per repo  
You can tag the messages, but if you follow the repo, you get everything  
Gabi Droege11:12 AM  
ok, than rather let's go for a separate repo :)  
Gabi Droege11:14 AM  
http://lists.tdwg.org/mailman/listinfo  
You3:58 PM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zj-diRvKiFHFtx2xxsixD3HKEMLfsspzbF9Bk6wrxbA/edit#  
You4:03 PM  
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zj-diRvKiFHFtx2xxsixD3HKEMLfsspzbF9Bk6wrxbA/edit#  
Richard Pyle4:06 PM  
I am willing to help on co-convening as well, but will have inconsistent availability (so don'[t rely on me).  But when I am available, I'm willing to put in extra work to move things along.  
John Wieczorek4:14 PM  
We talked about alignments, or resource that inform, such as the BCO. O&M seems a perfect additional example.  
Simon Cox4:40 PM  
https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn-ext/#oboe  
https://www.w3.org/TR/vocab-ssn/#PROV_Alignment  
