# 2022-02-16 Material Sample Task Group Meeting Notes
## Participants
### 10AM MST
Steve Baskaufs, Jutta Buschbaum, Dag Endresen, Steven Richard, Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Roger Burkhalter, Stan Blum
### 4PM MST
Teresa Mayfield-Meyer, Roger Burkhalter, Stan Blum, John W
## Agenda Items
Google Sheet with terms for review - [MaterialSample and its properties](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KWWGF6p4BREoDZy7HeVbC3NEFIMzNbA78sMsOR6uX_k/edit?usp=sharing)  
## Items for discussion
1. Do we need a new identifier for the digital record of the material? (in addition to materialSampleID) - beyond scope for now?  

2. materialSampleType
    a. =What do you have?  
    b. There seems to be a hierarchy, but can we (do we want to) handle that?  
    c. Look at what people actually use then mine it for a starting point.  
    d. Need to point to the vocabulary you are using. Request iri  
    e. Do we allow for comma separated lists here or add a new term materialSampleTypeKeywords or some other thing for more detailed info and make materialSampleType a very limited list of terms for broad categorization?  
3. Terms to deprecate as they are part of potential materialSampleType controlled vocabulary  
     a. PreservedSpecimen  
     b. LivingSpecimen  
     c. FossilSpecimen  
4. Abby suggests that we need some educational materials - a paper, etc. to inform the community about the changes and how to use them.  
5. What is the process for linking to other information (event, identification, etc.)? Will we need terms for that? For instance, would we need samplingEvent in order to link up with information about how/when/where the sample was obtained and samplePreservationEvent to link up with information about how/when/who preserved it? John W.?  
6. OBI MaterialSample -- Did we finish the discussion on pros and cons of aligning the dwc MaterialSample term with the OBI ontology term? OBI_0100051 - see Audubon Core revision and addition of new column.  

## Next steps and assignments
1. Narrow the group of terms for first pass at MaterialSample bag of terms  
2. Create a controlled vocabulary for materialSampleType  
3. We should document our process and decision making for handoff to the next steps see https://github.com/tdwg/vocab/blob/master/vms/maintenance-specification.md#4-vocabulary-enhancements  
4. John W. says not to require GUID in materialSampleID Woo Hoo makes everything simpler! Reasoning - we need a materialSample primary key and it should be materialSampleID whether it is globally unique or not. Separating the two will create issues.  
5. catalogNumber does not belong as a property of MaterialSample because multiple samples may carry the same catalogNumber. However, catalogNumber definition needs a revision.  
## Meeting Chat 10AM MDT
10:01:34 From  Teresa Mayfield-Meyer  to  Everyone:  
	https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1KWWGF6p4BREoDZy7HeVbC3NEFIMzNbA78sMsOR6uX_k/edit#gid=0  
10:01:52 From  Teresa Mayfield-Meyer  to  Everyone:  
	https://docs.google.com/document/d/1tAiK5-SPgC1UOF76mAp6sR0TjUOWbTLDrb-YWIZMpys/edit  
10:02:48 From  Steve Baskauf  to  Everyone:  
	So sorry to hear that  
10:06:30 From  Steve Baskauf  to  Everyone:  
	https://github.com/tdwg/ac/issues/220  
10:09:49 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	sawsdlrdf:modelReference  
10:11:03 From  Stephen Richard  to  Everyone:  
	documentation for sawsdlref:modelReference says "<xs:documentation>This element is for use in WSDL 1.1 only. It does not apply to WSDL 2.0 documents. Use in WSDL 2.0 documents is invalid.</xs:documentation>"  
10:14:20 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Can we simply use catalogNumber for the non-PIDs  
10:20:41 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	http://rs.tdwg.org/dwc/terms/associatedMedia  
10:21:59 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Move associatedMedia to Record-level?  
10:23:41 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	In GBIF there is also https://rs.gbif.org/extension/gbif/1.0/multimedia.xml  
10:28:29 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	Terms of interest? from TDWG-CD:  
10:29:22 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	objectType, preparationType, preservationMethod, preservationMode  
10:30:34 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	material, typeOfCollection  
10:37:55 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	dwc:preservation = A list (concatenated and separated) of preparations and preservation methods for a specimen.  
10:38:42 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	preparationType: https://github.com/tdwg/cd/issues/64  
10:39:00 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	preservationMethod: https://github.com/tdwg/cd/issues/65  
10:43:49 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Will we see the Digital Extended Specimen as this type of Information Artefact?  
10:45:03 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	Do we reference BCO? for the broader class hierarchy?  (I think that’s where “information artifact” and “material sample” came into DwC discussions.)  
10:45:48 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	+1 @Stan using sawsdlrdf:modelReference ?  
10:47:58 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	Maybe not as formally as using SAWSDL, but in explanatory (non-normative) documentation; i.e., introduction to our output.  
10:48:58 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Dwc:MStype vs dwciri:MStype ??  
10:49:06 From  Jutta Buschbom  to  Everyone:  
	@Dag: I think that a DES is something else entirely, ie. neither informationArtefact nor materialSample.  
10:57:32 From  Stephen Richard  to  Everyone:  
	+1 for proposing a draft vocabulary for specimen type  
10:59:36 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Could an environment sample also become a preserved “specimen” ??  
10:59:49 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	I think elaborating the vocal for Material Sample Type will involve a broader community than TDWG.  So we (next group) should post notifications in groups like RDA, DataOne, etc., and elaborate those that matter to TDWG (Biodiversity).  
11:00:10 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	vocal => vocabulary  
11:00:28 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Destructively sampled material sample would be different from a preserved specimen.  
11:01:59 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	“Destructively sampled material sample” begins to overlap with Disposition  
11:03:38 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	Collection description would summarize (list of) item level types.  
11:04:18 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	Preservation history ??  
11:04:53 From  Stan Blum  to  Everyone:  
	That depends on the capabilities of the transport (serialization) scheme.  
11:05:16 From  Dag Endresen  to  Everyone:  
	parentMaterialSampleID  

## Meeting Chat 4PM MDT
15:01:41 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P_ZbUwnvZ3JtEFj-4Y3teJTV2N-2PB6Eq86v2X8Xlg4/edit?usp=sharing  
15:30:08 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	A physical object that that represents a physical entity of interest in whole or in part.  
15:33:30 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	Physical object  
	Represents something larger of interest  
	Identifiable, described, curated?  
15:34:05 From Sharon Grant to Everyone:  
	"Some artificial action performed on the physical object to manipulate it"  
15:37:35 From John Wieczorek to Everyone:  
	“A physical object that represents a physical entity of interest in whole or in part and was at some point included in a physical collection.”  
