# 2024-02-20 TDWG Working Meeting Material Sample Task Group Meeting Notes
## Participants
Please add your name and affiliation.
* Teresa J Mayfield-Meyer, Arctos Community Coordinator
* Stan Blum, TDWG
* Patricia Mergen
* David Shorthouse, Agriculture & Agri-Food Canada
* Steve Baskauf, Vanderbilt Heard Libraries
* Jutta Buschbom, Statistical Genetics, DE & RECODE NHM London, UK
* Christian Bolling
## Agenda Items
### Helpful links
[Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1iZDVzmA52lbwKFRdWwdQTtaP11I9awNH?usp=sharing)  
### Items for discussion
1. Accepted changes to the Darwin Core complete - [Current milestone](https://github.com/tdwg/material-sample/milestone/1)  
2. [MaterialSample Task Group Summary Document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MT2YV-I97gX4LNJ5jI45FmxzSOdCWfz7OBu5Bz7bBMY/edit?usp=sharing)  
## Meeting Chat
13:29:24 From Teresa Mayfield-Meyer to Everyone:  
	https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rrqfLetvniDNQJjrrUQVbQe0XBopMEqRs2Gwbz5usHY/edit  
13:34:22 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Q: What will/should happen to MaterialSample in DwC?  
13:35:18 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	In particular, the lone term there, dwc:materialSampleID.  
13:39:17 From Ben Norton to Everyone:  
	https://ontology.buffalo.edu/smith/articles/Material_Entities.pdf  
13:39:34 From Ben Norton to Everyone:  
	https://www.ebi.ac.uk/ols4/ontologies/efo/classes/http%253A%252F%252Fpurl.obolibrary.org%252Fobo%252FBFO_0000040?lang=en  
13:43:42 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	When are dwc:materialEntityID and dwc:materialSampleID not the same?  
13:44:07 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	Material entities don‚Äôt have to be samples  
13:44:54 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Example?  
13:45:53 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	I note one of the example for MaterialEntity = ‚Äúa specific water sample‚Äù  
13:46:22 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	Example:  how about a geological section?  
13:46:55 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	VMS section 4.4.2.3 https://github.com/tdwg/vocab/blob/master/sds/documentation-specification.md#44-vocabularies-term-lists-and-terms  
13:46:55 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Now this one makes it clear as example for MaterialEntity = ‚Äúan instance of a printed photograph‚Äù. It‚Äôd not have a materialSampleID.  
13:47:04 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	Exists in the real world as something material and many samples may come from it.  
13:56:02 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	I think it is possible if not likely that the GBIF model will become a model (not necessarily THE model) that gets included as a structure built on top of the DwC bag of terms. It is heavily use-case driven, so it meets that requirement that you need to say what you are trying to accomplish. And it‚Äôs being tested, so it will have the required implementation experience as well.  
13:56:06 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Q: Any signals of impact / use in eg GBIF‚Äôs IPT?  
13:57:42 From Stan Blum to Everyone:  
	I saw that GBIF is preparing IPT3, based on frictionless data; will free us from the ‚Äústar schema‚Äù and Darwin Core Archives.  
13:59:08 From James to Everyone:  
	Reacted to "I saw that GBIF is p..." with ‚ù§Ô∏è  
13:59:13 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Reacted to "I saw that GBIF is p..." with üëç  
14:06:59 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:   
	Replying to "Q: Any signals of im..."  
	
	Perhaps recommendations for what to do in the IPT / data mapping when there are materialEntityIDs, but challenged to additionally produce occurrenceIDs when sharing data.  
14:07:08 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	The classes into which Darwin Core terms are organized are basically a suggestion. Part of the problem depends on how normalized you want the model to be. Compare ABCD to DwC for example. https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-94IU0esQh-8/XP_Ymi1DSLI/AAAAAAAABzQ/LVQ1bDSzW84CzDsGObA2BHEUV0bzQk0HwCLcBGAs/s1600/abcd-graph-model.png  
14:13:14 From Ben Norton to Everyone:  
	BFO is a 'high level' ontology designed to be above any domain.  
14:16:13 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	One use-case that comes to mind: BOLD stops sharing data to GBIF as occurrences, investing instead on resolution activities to source, parent materialEntities üòÉ. Would need barcoding project w/ Guelph.  
14:19:07 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	https://www.gbif.org/document/80862/report-of-the-tdwg-vocabulary-management-task-group-vomag  
14:20:45 From TDWG Working Sessions to Everyone:  
	BISS publication about the Views TG http://doi.org/10.3897/biss.7.94188  
14:24:15 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	Recommendation: I see that materialEntityID is not a searchable term for ‚Äúoccurrences‚Äù on GBIF, not via its API. It should be.  
14:26:19 From Christian B√∂lling to Everyone:  
	Hat auf "Recommendation: I ..." mit üëç reagiert  
14:27:25 From James to Everyone:  
	Reacted to "Recommendation: I se..." with üëç  
14:29:00 From Christian B√∂lling to Everyone:  
	Hat ein üëç aus "Recommendation: I ..." entfernt  
14:29:01 From Christian B√∂lling to Everyone:  
	Hat auf "Recommendation: I ..." mit üëç reagiert  
14:29:21 From James to Everyone:  
	ChatGPT r us ;-)  
14:30:00 From David Shorthouse to Everyone:  
	I‚Äôm doing it as we speak! (Just kidding‚Ä¶)  
14:31:21 From Ben Norton to Everyone:  
	https://chat.openai.com/  
14:37:51 From James to Everyone:  
	Lots of folks now under pressure to reduce travel footprints now though... Conferences do make a good target and we did used to do this quite regularly  
  
